FOUNDATION COURSES OFFERED BY DEPARTMENT
OF CHEMISTRY, NSUT.
COURSE : ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND GREEN CHEMISTRY
A. OVERVIEW OF COURSE
Name of Course Environmental Science and Green Chemistry
Offering Department Department of Chemistry
B.Tech Branches to which this course is
offered
All Branches of Sem I and II
OVERVIEW:
The Environmental Science and Green Chemistry course is offered to first-year students of all B. Tech 
branches. In this course, basic knowledge of Green Chemistry, Environmental Science and Analytical 
Techniques, their motive and applications in day-to-day life is being provided to I Year students. The 
objective is to cover a broad spectrum in the field of Environment and Green Chemistry.
This will help the students of these branches to understand the fact that Environmental Chemistry is 
different from Green Chemistry. While Green chemistry aims to reduce potential pollution at its source by 
chemically engineering products that minimize such pollution, Environmental Chemistry is simply the 
study of biochemical and chemical phenomena that occur in the environment. This will give an 
opportunity to the students to know the occurrence, movements, and transformations of chemicals in the 
environment.
B. SYLLABUS (THEORY)
Course No Title of the Course Course Structure Pre-Requisite
FCCH0103 Environmental Science and 
Green Chemistry
L-T-P
3-0-2
None
COURSE CONTENT
UNIT 1
Environmental Sciences: Introduction, Air pollution*, water pollution*, Soil Pollution*, Solid waste management, 
Nuclear hazards*, Electronic Waste*, Case Studies (Bhopal Gas tragedy and Chernobyl), Bio-remediation.
(*causes, prevention and remedies of all types to be discussed) 
UNIT II
Water Chemistry: Water Quality Parameters: Hardness of water and treatment, alkalinity of water, Biological 
and Bacteriological parameters (COD and BOD), Numericals on Hardness of water based on ions present and 
EDTA titration method, Numericals on alkalinity of water (total and individual alkalinity, P and M only)
UNIT III
Green Chemistry: Introduction to Green Chemistry, Principles of green chemistry with special emphasis on 
principles 1, 2, 5, 6 and 9. Real-world cases: surfactants for CO2, designing for environmentally safe marine 
antifoulants, Biodegradable plastics and Biodiesel synthesis and use. 
2
UNIT IV
Green Fuels and Bio-Polymer chemistry: Introduction and importance of green fuels, Green hydrogen, 
Photocatalytic and Photoelectrochemical water splitting, Hydrogen fuel cell, Production of Biodiesel from 
Jatropha and Biomass-based ethanol, Synthesis and applications of certain: biocompatible polymers - Polylacetic 
Acid, Cellulose and Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), Nanomaterials; Advantages of biocompatible materials over 
synthetic materials.
UNIT V 
Analytical Techniques in Chemistry: Introduction to Chromatography, Adsorption (TLC and column 
chromatography) Chromatography, Partition Chromatography (paper chromatography) and examples of mixtures 
to be separated using both types of chromatographic techniques, Introduction to UV-Visible spectroscopy, 
Instrumentation and Applications.
SUGGESTED READINGS
1. Green Chemistry: Theory & Practice/P.T. Anastas & J.C. Warner/ Oxford Univ Press, 2000.
2. Solar-Driven Green Hydrogen Generation and Storage, Elsevier Science Publisher, 2023.
3. Green Biopolymers and Their Nanocomposite – Dhorali Gnanasekaran, Spinger publisher, 2000
4. Applications of absorption spectroscopy of organic compounds by John Robert Dyer, 2019.
5. Organic Spectroscopy by William Kemp, Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
6. Perspectives in Environmental Studies by A Kaushik and C P Kaushik, New Age International (P) Ltd., 
Publishers, 2006.
7. A Text Book of Environmental Studies by Shashi Chawla, Himalaya Publishing House, 2017.
8. Engineering Chemistry by Jain & Jain, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company (P) Limited, 2004. 
Lab Class 
No. Name of the Experiment
1 Introduction to Lab.
2 Preparation of chalcones.
3 Preparation of biodiesel from vegetable oil.
4
Determination of total alkalinity and alkalinity due to individual ions in each water 
sample by using phenolphthalein and methyl orange as indicators (Acid-Base 
titration).
5 Determination of temporary and permanent and total hardness of a given water 
sample by titrating against EDTA. (Complexometric titration).
6 Solvent-free Synthesis of azomethine.
7 Blueprinting: photoreduction of ferric oxalate using sunlight.
8 Preparation of nanoparticles employing greener precursors under milder 
conditions.
9
MINI PROJECT
a) Synthesis: Acetylation of primary amines using a 
greener approach.
10 b) TLC Analysis of the synthesised compound.
11 c) Spectroscopic Analysis of the synthesised compound 
using FTIR. 
3
12 d) Mini project discussion and evaluation.
D. LESSON PLAN FOR LAB
E. SELF STUDY
S.No. Topic Unit
1 Indian knowledge system in the context of Science and 
Technology in Ancient Indian Texts by Bal Ram Singh, Girish 
Nath Jha, Umesh Kumar Singh and Diwakar Mishra.
a) Green Pharmaceutical Production
b) The Art of Organic Synthesis: The Green Route
c) The Green Route, Green Redox Catalysis
d) Acids & Bases- Greener Alternatives
I and III
2 Practical Demonstration for skill enhancement
3 As suggested by the Course instructor/CCC to bridge any gap in the curriculum

COURSE OUTCOMES (COs)
After completion of this course, the students are expected to be able to demonstrate the following 
knowledge, skills and attitudes:
CO 1: Enhance their vocabulary for the purpose of accurate & proper comprehension
and articulation.
CO 2: Form grammatically correct sentences leading coherent and error free
communication.
CO 3: Communicate coherently and confidently—written and oral—in any
formal/official/business situation.
CO 4: Excel in non-verbal aspects of communication like confidence, body-language,
tone, pitch and pace in formal and business communication.
CO 5: Engage with —written/video/audio/audio-visual—for accurate extraction of
meaning and absorption of structures of language.
COURSE CONTENT
Lab Activities
Lab Activity No 1: Introducing Oneself: Breaking the Ice (CO 3, 4)
Lab Activity No 2: Reading from newspapers/magazines/blogs to build up a
repertoire of words CO 1, 2, 5
Lab Activity No 3: Listening Comprehension CO 1, 2, 3, 5
Lab Activity No 4: Role-Play CO 2, 3, 4
Lab Activity No 5: Facing Job Interviews CO 5
Lab Activity No 6: Group Discussion CO 3, 4
Lab Activity No 7: Declamation/Speech CO 3, 4
Lab Activity No 8: Presentation with PPT CO 2, 3 
SUGGESTED READINGS
1. High School English Grammar & Composition by Wren & Martin, 
2016
2. Intermediate English Grammar by Raymond Murphy, Second
Edition. 
3. Advanced English Grammar by Martin Hewings. 1999.
4. McGraw-Hill Handbook of English Grammar and Usage by Mark 


. LESSON PLAN for THEORY LECTURE 
Lecture No. Topic to be covered Unit
1 Exact differential equations 
Unit 
1 
1 Exact differential equations 
Unit 
1 
(7) 
2 Second & higher order linear differential equation with constant 
coefficients 
3 Second & higher order linear differential equation with constant 
coefficients 
4 Application of Second & higher order linear differential equation 
with constant coefficients 
5 Euler-Cauchy equation 
6 Series solution by Frobenius method 
7 Series solution by Frobenius method. 
8 Elementary row transformation of a matrix 
Unit 
2 
(6) 
9 Rank of a matrix, consistency and inconsistency of system of 
simultaneous equations 
10 Solution of homogeneous equations 
11 Solution of non-homogeneous equations 
12 Eigenvalue and Eigenvector 
13 Characteristic equation and Cayley-Hamilton theorem 
14 Gauss elimination method to solve system of linear equations 
Unit 
3 
(8) 
15 LU decomposition method 
16 Gauss Seidel iteration method 
17 Newton-Raphson method to find roots of polynomial and 
transcendental equations 
MID SEMESTER EXAMS
18 Numerical Integration by trapezoidal rule and Simpson’s 1/3 and 3/8 
rule 
19 Numerical Integration by trapezoidal rule and Simpson’s 1/3 and 3/8 
rule 
20 Euler’s method to solve the initial value problem 
21 Runge-Kutta method of fourth order to solve the initial value 
problem 
22 Functions of a complex variable 
Unit 
4 
(10) 
23 Cauchy-Riemann equations and related problems 
24 Analytic functions 
40 Regression analysis 
(7) 
2 Second & higher order linear differential eq
Lester, 2017.
5. Examine your English ' by Margaret M Maison, 1964.
6. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice by Meenakshi 
Raman, Third Edition, 2015.
LESSON PLAN for THEORY LECTURE
Lecture No. Topic to be covered Unit
1
Importance of Vocabulary: Using exact words for producing precise 
meanings, awareness of the subtle differences between synonyms I
2
Using a standard dictionary- word spellings, meanings, usage,
pronunciation, making sentences
3 Spellings rules & Spellings
4 Collocations
5 Commonly Misused Words
6 Commonly Misused Words
7 One-word substitutions
8 Abbreviations & foreign phrases
9 Tenses
II
10 Tenses
CLASS TEST -1
11 Active and Passive Voice
12 Active and Passive Voice
13 Direct and Indirect Speech
14 Direct and Indirect Speech
15 Prepositions
16 Articles 
17 Question tags
18 Redundancy, Editing 
19 Punctuation
20 Idioms & Phrases
MID SEMESTER EXAMS
21 Writing self-assessment tasks- SWOT analysis &amp; Johari 
window.
III
22 Precis and summary writing.
23 Precis and summary writing.
24 Writing a Paragraph.
25 Writing an Essay.
26 Writing an Essay.
27 Book Review
28 Book Review
29 Informal Letter writing.
30 Formal Letter writing (Letters pertaining to sales, claim, order, 
inquiry, credit etc.)
IV
31 Formal Letter writing (Letters pertaining to sales, claim, order, 
inquiry, credit etc.)
32 Statement of Purpose
33 Job application
34 Resume.
35 Communication Skills: Definition and significance, Types of 
Communication
V
36 7Cs of Communication
37 Barriers to communication
38 Reading the given texts to skim, scan, infer and answer 
comprehension questions.
39 Reading the given texts to skim, scan, infer and answer 
comprehension questions.
40 Reading the given texts to skim, scan, infer and answer 
comprehension questions.
D. LESSON PLAN for LAB
Lab Class 
No. Name of the Activity
1 Introducing Oneself: Breaking the Ice
2
Reading from newspapers/magazines/blogs to build up a repertoire of 
words
3 Listening Comprehension
4 Role-Play
5 Facing Job Interviews
6 Facing Job Interviews
7 Group Discussio

