POLICY Title of Policy: “Policy on Adoption of Open Source
Software for Government of India” Preamble Government of India (GoI)
is implementing the Digital India programme as an umbrella programme
to prepare India for a knowledge based transformation into a
digitally empowered society and a knowle dge economy. Under the
overarching vision of Digital India, GoI aims to make Government
services digitally accessible to citizens in their localities and to
ensure efficiency, transparency and reliability of such services at affordable
costs. To meet this objective, there is a need to
set up a commensurate hardware and software infrastructure, which may
require significant resources. Organizations worldwide have adopted innovative alternative solutions
in order to optimise cos ts by exploring avenues of
“Open Source Software”. GoI has also been promoting the use
of open source technologies in the eGovernance domain within the
country i n order to leverage economic and strategic beneifts.
Further, the National Policy on Information Technology, 2012 has mentioned,
as one of its objectives, to “Adopt open standards and
promote open source and open technologies". F. No. 1(3)/2014 –
EG II Ministry of Communication & Information Technology Department of
Electronic s & Information Technology Page 2 of 8 In
view of the above, there is a need to formulate
a policy for the Government Organizations to adop t Open
Source Software. The “Policy on Adoption of Open Source Software
for Government of India” (hereinafter referred to as “Policy”) will
encourage the formal adoption and use of Open Source Software
(OSS) in Government Organizations. 1. Objectives To provide a policy
framework for rapid and effective adoption of OSS To ensure
strategic control in e-Governance applications and systems from a long-term
perspective. To reduce the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of
projects. 2. Definitions Refer Glossary (Page No. 7) F. No.
1(3)/2014 – EG II Ministry of Communication & Information Technology
Department of Electronics & Information Technology Page 3 of 8
3. Policy Statement Government of India shall endeavour to adopt
Open Source Software in all e-Governance systems imple mented by
various Government organizations, as a preferred option in comparison to
Closed Source Software (CSS). The Open Source Softwa re shall
have the following characteristics: 3.1 The source code shall be
available for the community / adopter / end-user to study
and mo dify the software and to redistribute copies of
either the original or modified software. 3.2 Source code shall
be free from any royalty. 4. Nature of Compliance Mandatory
5. Applicability The policy shall be applicable to all Government
Organisations under the Central Gov ernments and those State Governments
that choose to adopt this policy for the following categories
of e-Governance systems: All new e-Governanc e applications and systems
being considered for implementation. New versions of the legacy and
existing systems. The Common Services Centers Scheme: Background 1.1 The
Gov ernment of India has formulated the National E-Governance Plan
with the v ision of providing all government services in
an integrated manner at the doorste p of the citizen,
at an affordable cost. The NeGP initiatives consist of 26
Central, State and Integrated Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) along with
8 other support components for rapid introduction of e-governance in
the country. The NeGP envisions a three pillar model for
delivery of “web-enabled Anytime, Anywhere access” to information and services
in rural India. These are: a) Connectivity: State Wide Area
Networks (SWANs)/NICNET b) National Data Bank/ State Data Centres (SDCs)
c) Common Services Centers (CSCs) 1.2 The CSC Scheme, as
approved by the Government of India, envisions CSCs as the
front-end delivery points for Government, private and social sector services
to rural citizens of India, in an inte grated manner.
The objective is to develop a platform that can enable
Government, private and social sector organiza tions to align their
social and commercial goals for the benefit of the rural
population in the remotest corners of the country through a
combination of IT-based as well as non-IT-based services. 1.3 Thus,
the CSCs cannot be seen as mere service delivery points
in rural India. The CSC is positioned as a Change
Agent - that would promote rural entrepreneur ship, build rural
capacities and livelihoods, enable community participation and collective action for
social change - through a bottom-up model with focus on
the rural citizen. 1.4 Undertaking such a mammoth task calls
for active partici pation and close interaction amongst various stakeholders
such as State Governments, local bodies, opinion makers and a
gencies/ institutions involved or having interest, commercial or otherwise, in
rural areas/ markets. Under the CSC Scheme, a Public Private
Partnership (PPP) model has been proposed for undertaking this challenging
task and addressing the related issues in the most effective
way. 12. The Implementation Framework 2.1 The CSC Scheme has
a 3-tier implementation framework: a) At the first (CSC) level
would be the local Village Level Entrepreneur (VLE- loosely analogous
to a franchisee), to service the rural consumer in a
cluster of 5-6 villages. b) At the second/middle level would
be an entity termed the Service Centre Agency (SCA –
loosely analogous to a franchiser) to operate, manage and build
the VLE network and business. An SCA would be identified
for one or more districts (one district would cover 100-200
CSCs). c) At the third level would be the agency
designated by the State- the State Designated Agency (SDA) -
to facilitate implementation of the Scheme within the State and
to provide requisite policy, content and other support to the
SCAs. 3. Other Agencies 3.1 The National Level Service Agenc
y (NLSA): There are significant challenges in exploiting opportunities to
achieve economies of scale in the identification, customizatio n and
implementation of the physical and digital infrastructure required for the
project. Further, many of the potential citizen-centric services wo uld
lend themselves to aggregation at the national level. To enable
the State-specific implementation plans to benefit from such economies of
scale, aggregation of best practices, content providers, etc., the DIT
would be appointing a National Level Service Agency (NLSA ).
3.2 The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV): In addition to the
NLSA, an SPV has been proposed for the day-to-day monitoring
of the CSC Scheme, in terms of channeling Government support,
content aggregation, etc. While the SPV is proposed to be
set up d uring the initial implementation phase of the
Scheme, it is essentially an entity created to be an
integral part of the CSC 24. Role of various Agencies
4.1 Service Centre Agency (SCA): The Prime Driver 4.1.1. The
SCA would be the prime driver of the whole CSC
eco-system. The SCA would be supported by the NLSA and
the respective State Designated Agency (SDA) to implement the CSC
Scheme in the ir specified areas of operations. This could
include activities such as identifying the required applications and services,
harnessing the State Wide Area Network, identifying, selecting and training
the VLE, establishing the CSC (either directly or through the
VLE), supply ing, aggregating and updating content. 4.1.2. The success
or failure of the CSC Scheme hinges to a large
extent on the business and fina ncial capabilities of the
SCA, as the Scheme is not about rolling out IT
hardware in rural areas, but building 100,000 rural businesses in
h itherto untapped and unchartered areas of the country, besides
promoting rural entrepreneurship and involving community participation. 4.1.3. Th e
existing kiosks models are on a small scale. The CSC
Scheme at the scale it is proposed to be implemented
may pose a variety of complex new issue s in
terms of financing, channel management, technology, integration with local community,
etc. that may put the CSC network at risk, if
not supported b y a committed and financially strong SCA
with adequate experience of working with rural communities. Consequently, the
selection of the right SCA assumes significant importance for the
State. It is therefore recommended that the selection of the
SCAs should be undertaken with adequate care and caution, w
ith appropriate support from the NLSA and DIT. 4.2 The
Village Level Entrepreneur 4.2.1. The VLE is the key to
the success of the CSC operations. While cont ent and
services are important, it is the VLE’s entrepreneurial ability that
would ensure CSC sustainability. A good VLE is expected to
have some financial strength, entrepreneurial ability, strong social commitment as
well as respect within the community. The quality of service
at the CSCs would depend a great de al on
the quality of VLEs. 3