 
 POLICY Title of Policy: “Policy on Adoption of Open Source
Software for Government of India” Preamble Government of India (GoI)
is implementing the Digital India programme as an umbrella programme
to prepare India for a knowledge based transformation into a
digitally empowered society and a knowle dge economy. Under the
overarching vision of Digital India, GoI aims to make Government
services digitally accessible to citizens in their localities and to
ensure efficiency, transparency and reliability of such services at affordable
costs. To meet this objective, there is a need to
set up a commensurate hardware and software infrastructure, which may
require significant resources. Organizations worldwide have adopted innovative alternative solutions
in order to optimise cos ts by exploring avenues of
“Open Source Software”. GoI has also been promoting the use
of open source technologies in the eGovernance domain within the
country i n order to leverage economic and strategic beneifts.
Further, the National Policy on Information Technology, 2012 has mentioned,
as one of its objectives, to “Adopt open standards and
File Number (For Office Use Only) 
  
 promote open source and open technologies". F. No. 1(3)/2014 –
EG II Ministry of Communication & Information Technology Department of
Electronic s & Information Technology Page 2 of 8 In
view of the above, there is a need to formulate
a policy for the Government Organizations to adop t Open
Source Software. The “Policy on Adoption of Open Source Software
for Government of India” (hereinafter referred to as “Policy”) will
encourage the formal adoption and use of Open Source Software
(OSS) in Government Organizations. 1. Objectives To provide a policy
framework for rapid and effective adoption of OSS To ensure
strategic control in e-Governance applications and systems from a long-term
perspective. To reduce the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of
projects. 2. Definitions Refer Glossary (Page No. 7) F. No.
1(3)/2014 – EG II Ministry of Communication & Information Technology
Department of Electronics & Information Technology Page 3 of 8
3. Policy Statement Government of India shall endeavour to adopt
Open Source Software in all e-Governance systems imple mented by
various Government organizations, as a preferred option in comparison to
Closed Source Software (CSS). The Open Source Softwa re shall
have the following characteristics: 3.1 The source code shall be
available for the community / adopter / end-user to study
and mo dify the software and to redistribute copies of
either the original or modified software. 3.2 Source code shall
be free from any royalty. 4. Nature of Compliance Mandatory
5. Applicability The policy shall be applicable to all Government
Organisations under the Central Gov ernments and those State Governments
that choose to adopt this policy for the following categories
of e-Governance systems: All new e-Governanc e applications and systems
being considered for implementation. New versions of the legacy and
existing systems. The Common Services Centers Scheme: Background 1.1 The
Gov ernment of India has formulated the National E-Governance Plan
with the v ision of providing all government services in
an integrated manner at the doorste p of the citizen,
at an affordable cost. The NeGP initiatives consist of 26
Central, State and Integrated Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) along with
8 other support components for rapid introduction of e-governance in
the country. The NeGP envisions a three pillar model for
delivery of “web-enabled Anytime, Anywhere access” to information and services
in rural India. These are: a) Connectivity: State Wide Area
Networks (SWANs)/NICNET b) National Data Bank/ State Data Centres (SDCs)
c) Common Services Centers (CSCs) 1.2 The CSC Scheme, as
approved by the Government of India, envisions CSCs as the
front-end delivery points for Government, private and social sector services
to rural citizens of India, in an inte grated manner.
The objective is to develop a platform that can enable
Government, private and social sector organiza tions to align their
social and commercial goals for the benefit of the rural
population in the remotest corners of the country through a
combination of IT-based as well as non-IT-based services. 1.3 Thus,
the CSCs cannot be seen as mere service delivery points
in rural India. The CSC is positioned as a Change
Agent - that would promote rural entrepreneur ship, build rural
capacities and livelihoods, enable community participation and collective action for
social change - through a bottom-up model with focus on
the rural citizen. 1.4 Undertaking such a mammoth task calls
for active partici pation and close interaction amongst various stakeholders
such as State Governments, local bodies, opinion makers and a
gencies/ institutions involved or having interest, commercial or otherwise, in
rural areas/ markets. Under the CSC Scheme, a Public Private
Partnership (PPP) model has been proposed for undertaking this challenging
task and addressing the related issues in the most effective
way. 12. The Implementation Framework 2.1 The CSC Scheme has
a 3-tier implementation framework: a) At the first (CSC) level
would be the local Village Level Entrepreneur (VLE- loosely analogous
to a franchisee), to service the rural consumer in a
 SCAs. 3. Other Agencies 3.1 The National Level Service Agenc
y (NLSA): There are significant challenges in exploiting opportunities to
achieve economies of scale in the identification, customizatio n and
implementation of the physical and digital infrastructure required for the
project. Further, many of the potential citizen-centric services wo uld
lend themselves to aggregation at the national level. To enable
the State-specific implementation plans to benefit from such economies of
scale, aggregation of best practices, content providers, etc., the DIT
would be appointing a National Level Service Agency (NLSA ).
3.2 The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV): In addition to the
NLSA, an SPV has been proposed for the day-to-day monitoring
of the CSC Scheme, in terms of channeling Government support,
content aggregation, etc. While the SPV is proposed to be
set up d uring the initial implementation phase of the
Scheme, it is essentially an entity created to be an
integral part of the CSC 24. Role of various Agencies
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
PCC APPLICATION FORM 
 
Please read the Passport Instruction Booklet carefully before filling the form. Fill this form in 
CAPITAL LETTERS using blue/ black ink ball point pen only. Furnishing of incorrect information/ 
suppression of information would lead to rejection of the application and would attract penal 
provisions as prescribed under the Passports Act, 1967. Please produce your original documents at 
the time of submission of the form. 
 
Passport Number  
   
 
Date of Issue (DD-MM-YYYY) 
Date of Expiry (DD-MM-YYYY) 
 
 
 
Signature/ Left Hand Thumb 
 

 
Impression of 
Illiterate 
 
Applicant and Minors who 
 

Place of Issue 

 
cannot sign. 

 
Region/Country for which PCC is 
required 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Applicant Details 
 
1.1 Applicant's Given Name (Given Name means First name followed by Middle name (If any))(Initials not allowed) 
  
 
 
Surname 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Aadhaar Number 
 
2. Family Details 
 
2.1 Father's Given Name (Given Name means First name followed by Middle name (If any)) (Initials not allowed) 
  
 
 
Surname 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 7 
 
 
 2.2 Mother's Given Name (Given Name means First name followed by Middle name (If any)) (Initials not allowed) 
 
 
Surname 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Legal Guardian's Given Name (If applicable) (Initials not allowed) 
 
 
 
Surname 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4 Spouse's Given Name (Given Name means First name followed by Middle name (If any)) (Initials not allowed) 
 
 
 
 
Surname 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Present Residential Address Details 
 
 3.1 House No. and Street Name 
 
 
 
Village or Town or City 
 
 
 
 
 District 
 
 
 
 Police Station 
 
 
 
 State/ UT 
 
 
 
 PIN 
 
 
Mobile Number 
Telephone Number 
 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
E-mail ID 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Is permanent address same as present address?    Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No (If no, provide details in Column 
4 below) 
  
4. Permanent Residential Address (If it is different from present residential address) 
House No. and Street Name 
 
 
 
Village or Town or City 
 
 
 
 
District 
 
 
 
 
Police Station 
 
 
 
 
State/ UT 
 
 
 
 
Region/Country 
 
 
 
 
PIN 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Number 
Telephone Number 
 
 
 
 
E-mail ID 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
` 
5. Other details 
 
 
5.1 Provide the following details if there are any criminal proceedings 
pending against the applicant. 
 
5.1.1 
Are any proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been 
committed by you pending before a criminal court in India? 
              If yes, fill Column 6.1 below 
  
5.1.2 
Has any warrant or summons for your appearance been issued & pending 
before a court under any law for the time being in force? 
              If yes, fill Column 6.2 below 
 
5.1.3 
Has a warrant for your arrest been issued by a court under any law for the 
time being in force? 
              If yes, fill Column 6.3 below 
 
5.1.4 
Has an order prohibiting your departure from India been made by any 
court? 
              If yes, fill Column 6.4 below 
 
5.2 Provide the following details if the applicant has been convicted by a 
court in India. 
 
5.2.1 
Have you, at any time during the period of five years immediately 
preceding the date of this application, been convicted by a court in India 
for any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof 
to imprisonment for not less than two years? 
If yes, fill Column 6.1 below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Provide the following details if there are proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have 
been committed by you pending before a criminal court in India and attach written permission from 
competent court. 
 Name of Court and Place 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Case/ FIR/ Warrant Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law and Section(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 7 
Yes 
No 
 
 
 
6.2 Provide the following details if there is any warrant or summons for your appearance been issued 
& pending before a court under any law for the time being in force and attach written permission from 
competent court. 
 Name of Court and Place 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Case/ FIR/ Warrant Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law and Section(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 Provide the following details if there is any warrant for your arrest been issued by a court under 
any law for the time being in force and attach written permission from competent court. 
 Name of Court and Place 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Case/ FIR/ Warrant Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law and Section(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4 Provide the following details if there is an order prohibiting your departure from India been made 
by any court and attach written permission from competent court. 
 Name of Court and Place 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Case/ FIR/ Warrant Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law and Section(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.5 Provide the following details if the applicant has been convicted by a court in India and attach 
copy of judgement. 
 Name of Court and Place 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case/ FIR/ Warrant Number 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 Date of Conviction (DD-MM-YYYY) 
 
- 
          - 
 
  7. Enclosures 
 
 
1. 
6. 
 
 
2. 
7. 
 
 
3. 
8. 
 
 
4. 
9. 
 
 
5. 
10. 
 
 
  
 
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
 8. Self Declaration 
I owe allegiance to the sovereignty, unity & integrity of India, and have not voluntarily acquired citizenship or 
travel document of any other country.  I have not lost, surrendered or been deprived of the citizenship of 
India.  I have not contravened any of the conditions relating to the possession and use of an Indian passport. 
  
I affirm that the information and particulars given by me in this form are true and correct.  I further state that I 
am not suppressing any material information in this regard.  I further affirm that the enclosures and 
documentary proof submitted in support of my application for an Indian passport are authentic and solely 
pertain to me and I am fully responsible for the accuracy of the same.  I am liable to be penalized or 
prosecuted if found otherwise.  I am aware that under the Passports Act, 1967 it is a criminal offence to 
furnish any false information or to suppress any material information with a view to obtaining passport or 
travel document. 
  
I have read and understood the contents of the above and by submitting this form certify that all the 
information submitted by me in the form is bonafide.
 
 Place 
 
 
 Date (DD-MM-YYYY) 
 
- 
- 
 
  
Signature/ Left Hand 
 
Thumb Impression of 
  
Applicant (If applicant is 
 
minor either parent to 
 
sign) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
